./earcongen.py --notes          # the reasoning, condensed
./earcongen.py --list-voices    # bell chime marimba glass pluck alert alarm sine
./earcongen.py --voice marimba --note-ms 190 --gap-ms 130 --out audio/marimba --play
./earcongen.py --dump-spec > family.json   # edit, then --spec family.json

Family membership comes from three shared parameters (voice, scale, 
root); distinguishability comes from contour plus a per-earcon 
root_offset. So --voice bell --scale hirajoshi reskins the whole set 
while keeping every alert individually recognizable. If a tone 
irritates, raise --attack-ms before touching anything else — that's 
almost always the culprit. If it's hard to hear over engine noise, try 
--voice marimba before raising gain; legibility is usually timbre, not 
volume.

One thing to watch: default --note-ms inherits the voice's decay time,
so chime lands around 1.17s total file length. Most of that is ring-out,
but if it feels sluggish, drop --tail-ms to 120 and --gap-ms to 120.

I can synthesize tones programmatically (numpy + the stdlib wave 
module, no external deps) and write finished WAVs. The caveat is that I 
can't hear them. I'd be designing against known psychoacoustics, not 
judgement by ear, so the first pass would need you to audition and 
iterate. That's a fast loop, but it is a loop.

The principles that actually determine whether a tone is pleasant or 
irritating, in rough order of impact:

Envelope beats pitch. A sub-5ms attack reads as a click or an alarm. A 
15–40ms attack with a long exponential decay (300–700ms) reads as a 
bell or chime — you notice it, but nothing in your body flinches. This 
is the single biggest lever, and it's why a cheap piezo beep is hateful 
and a marimba note isn't.

Stay out of 2–4 kHz. That's the band the ear is most sensitive to and 
where alarms, sirens, and screams live. Fundamentals in roughly 500 
Hz–1.2 kHz cut through Elite's mix (which is heavy in low end and 
midrange) without being shrill.

Timbre. Pure sines sound synthetic and get fatiguing. A fundamental 
plus two or three quiet harmonics, or light FM with a low modulation 
index, gives an instrument-like tone that's softer at the same 
loudness.

Motifs, not single beeps. Two or three notes are far more 
distinguishable and memorable than one, and they carry meaning through 
contour: rising = opportunity or permission, falling = attention or 
degradation, repeated same-pitch = neutral status. Used consistently, 
you learn the vocabulary without reading a manual.

One pitch set for the whole family. Pick a pentatonic scale and draw 
every earcon from it. The reason is practical, not aesthetic: two 
alerts will eventually fire within a second of each other, and any two 
notes from a pentatonic sound fine together. Anything else and you get 
an accidental dissonance you can't design around.

Normalize by perceived loudness, not peak amplitude. A 1 kHz tone at 
the same amplitude as a 500 Hz tone sounds noticeably louder. Without 
compensation your set will feel unbalanced no matter how good each tone 
is individually.

Keep everything under ~600ms, one-shot, never looping. Looping is what 
makes alarms unbearable. Files are trivial — 500ms mono 44.1k/16-bit 
WAV is about 44 KB, and WAV avoids a Vorbis decoder dependency for no 
meaningful size penalty at this scale.
